Half-Wave (Cascade) Voltage Doubler

Figure 12 illustrates the half-wave voltage doubler, which operates in a slightly different fashion. Because of its configuration, this circuit is also known as the cascade voltage doubler. One immediately apparent advantage of the circuit is that one side of the supply is common with the negative output terminal, permitting both to be grounded. This is especially of advantage in transformerless circuits opera-ted directly from the ac supply line.

Assume initially that diode V2 is disconnected from the circuit. When the top of the transformer secondary is instantaneously negative (during negative half-cycles), an electron current flows through diode V1 in the direction indicated by the dotted arrows, and charges up capacitor C1 to the peak value (E) of the transformer secondary voltage. It is evident that the top plate of C1 becomes positively charged.

Consider the voltage at point X in Fig. 12, which is the junction of the upper plate of C and the cathode of V1. The voltage across the transformer secondary fluctuates between peak values of +E, as shown by the upper waveform in Fig. 12, right. After a few cycles capacitor C1 charges up to the positive peak value of the supply voltage (+12) and holds this charge. Since the capacitor is in series with the transformer secondary the voltage across the capacitor-transformer combination (between point X and ground) fluctuates around its steady value of +E by the amount of the secondary voltage variations. On positive half-cycles the voltage at X becomes +2E [the capacitor voltage (+E) plus the peak ac voltage (+E)], while on negative half-cycles the secondary peak voltage (—E) subtracts from the capacitor voltage (+E), and the resultant voltage at point X becomes zero. This is shown by the lower waveform in Fig. 12.

If diode V2 is now connected in the circuit, the voltage between point X and ground will tend to charge capacitor C2 to the peak voltage existing at point X, or 2E. This takes place during alternate half-cycles, when the top of the transformer secondary is positive and a current flows through diode V2 in the direction indicated by the solid arrows. During these cycles capacitor C2 charges up to twice the ac supply voltage across the transformer secondary or 2E. The circuit is a half-wave doubler because rectified current flows to the load only on alternate halves of the ac input cycle. The regulation of the half-wave doubler is even poorer than that of the full-wave type.