When the plate voltage of a diode is made negative with respect to the cathode, the electrons in the space charge are strongly repelled from the negatively charged plate and some are actually driven back into the cathode. Since no electrons reach the plate, no plate current ﬂows, and the tube acts essentially as an open circuit. From the above it may be concluded that electron ﬂow within a diode is always from cathode to plate, provided the plate is made positive with respect to the cathode.

Since the plate current is limited when the diode conducts, the tube exhibits a certain forward resistance (Rf) defined as Eb/Ib for Eb>0. This forward resistance varies from about 100 to 1000 ohms for practical vacuum diodes. The back resistance (Rb) defined as Eb/Ib for Eb<0, has a range from about 100 to 1000 megohms, or about a million times as high as the forward resistance. Vacuum diodes have practically perfect unilateral conduction and effectively present an open circuit to negative plate voltages.

Thermionic Gas Diode. The construction of a thermionic gas diode is similar to that of vacuum diodes, except that a certain amount of gas is purposely introduced into the tube envelope. Ordinarily mercury vapor in equilibrium with liquid mercury is used, but occasionally an inert gas such as helium, neon, or argon may be employed. The presence of a gas radically affects the behavior of the tube.

The Ib-Eb characteristic of a typical gas diode is illustrated in Fig. 3. Note that plate current (Ib) increases gradually at first with increasing (positive) plate voltage, as in a vacuum diode. At a certain critical plate voltage, known variously as ionization potential, striking potential, or firing point, the plate current suddenly increases to a very large value, almost equal to the total electron emission of the cathode. What happens is essentially this: at a certain value of the plate voltage (striking potential), electrons colliding with gas molecules in their journey to the plate attain enough speed and energy to strip off one or more electrons from the outer shell of the molecules. This leaves the affected molecules with a net positive charge and they are then known as positive ions. The electrons freed from the gas molecules join the original electron stream and liberate still more electrons by colliding with other gas molecules. This process, called ionization, is cumulative and results in the sudden, dramatic increase in the plate current, evident in the Ib-Eb characteristic.

Although full electron emission is reached almost at once with the onset of ionization, the large emission current cannot be