the peak amplitude of the current. This means that a line drawn at 0.318 times the height of the peak current amplitude represents the average or steady direct current ﬂowing through the tube. Exactly the same is true for the dc output voltage. The average value of the pulsating dc output voltage is again only 0.318 times the value of the peak voltage appearing across the transformer secondary winding. (This theoretical value neglects the voltage drop in the transformer secondary and the voltage drop lost across the tube.) If the load draws a considerable current, the output voltage drops to an even lower value because of the increased drops across the tube and the transformer secondary.

Example: As a practical example, let us consider the half-wave rectifier circuit shown in Fig. 6, which employs a type 6W4-GT vacuum diode and a step-up power transformer with a 350-volt secOndary plate winding. Another secondary, called the filament winding, supplies 6.3 volts ac to the heater of the rectifier tube.

The root-mean-square (rms) value of the applied plate voltage across the transformer secondary must be multiplied by 1.414 to obtain the peak value of the applied ac voltage. We thus obtain 1.414 x 350, or 495 volts peak ac voltage. The average or dc output voltage, however, is only 0.318 times the peak value, or 0.318 x 4952156 volts. If we multiply the two factors together right away, we would see that the dc output voltage is only 0.45 times the rms value of the applied ac voltage (i.e., 1.414 x 031820.45) Equivalently, the rms value of the applied ac voltage must be 1/0.45, or 2.22 times the value of the desired dc output voltage. The dc output voltage of 156 volts in Fig. 6 represents a theoretical or maximum value. In practice, the voltage will be considerably lower because of the tube voltage drop and the voltage lost in the transformer secondary winding which we have neglected. More-over, when considerable load current is drawn, these voltage drops will increase and subtract still more from the available dc output voltage. However, the no-load dc output voltage of the circuit in Fig. 6 may actually rise above the rms value of the applied ac voltage when a suitable filter is connected across the output of the rectifier. This is because most filters employ capacitors that charge up to the peak value of the output-voltage pulsations and substantially maintain this value when the plate current drops to zero during negative half-cycles. The poor regulation of the circuit will not maintain a high output voltage when large load currents are drawn through the tube.

Limitations and Uses. We have already seen that a half-wave rectifier makes poor use of the ac supply, since it delivers power only half the time, during positive alternations of the supply voltage. As a result the ratio of the peak currents and voltages to the average current is high, the efficiency low, and the regulation poor. Half-wave rectifiers are not used, therefore, when more than a few-milliamperes load current is required. They are suitable