Another disadvantage of half—wave rectifiers is that the output current pulsates at the same frequency as the ac power line. Elaborate filter circuits are required to eliminate this low-frequency ripple and produce smooth direct current. Finally, note in Figs. 5 and 6 that the rectified output current flows through the secondary winding of the power transformer. This results in a dc magnetization which saturates the core of the power transformer. The efficiency of the transformer is considerably reduced and its expense goes up. The full-wave and other rectifier circuits, to be discussed next, avoid saturating the core of the power transformer by balancing out the dc magnetization with opposing currents.

9. The Full-Wave Rectifier

Plate current can be made to ﬂow during the full cycle of the ac supply voltage by the use of two diode half-wave rectifiers in a full-wave rectifier circuit (Fig. 7). The tubes alternately supply rectified current to the load during both halves of the ac input voltage in such a way that the load current always flOWs in the same direction.

Note in Fig. 7 that the cathodes of the two rectifier tubes are tied together and the common junction is connected to one side of the load resistor. The other end of the load is connected to the center-tap (C) of the secondary winding of the power transformer. (Two separate windings can be used instead of a single center-tapped winding.) Only one-half of the transformer secondary voltage appears between plate and cathode of each rectifier tube since each tube is connected between one end of the winding and a point midway in voltage (the center-tap). This means that the transformer secondary winding must supply a plate-to-plate voltage that is twice the value of the plate voltage required for each tube. To provide sufficient plate and output voltage, the transformer usually has a considerable step-up ratio between primary and secondary winding.

When an ac voltage is applied to the primary winding of the transformer, a voltage of the same shape (shown in Fig. 7), but enlarged in amplitude appears across the secondary winding. This secondary voltage is split in half, one-half appearing across V1 in series with the load, the other half appearing across V2 in series with the load. Assume that the polarities cause the top of the transformer secondary to be initially positive during the first