to the centertap, hence the plate of V2 is negative. No plate current flows through V2 during this half-cycle.

During the second half-cycle (B) of the ac input voltage the top of the transformer secondary will be negative with respect to the centertap. The plate of V1 is negative with respect to its cathode and no plate current ﬂows. This is indicated by the dotted line for the negative half-cycle of Ib1. During this same half-cycle, the bottom of the secondary winding is positive as is the plate of V2 with respect to the cathode junction. Consequently a plate current (Ib2) ﬂows from the cathode to the plate of V2, then through the bottom half of the transformer secondary and through the load, in the direction indicated by the bottom arrows. It is evident that the current ﬂows in the same direction through the load as it did during the previous half-cycle. Thus two positive half-cycles (A and B) appear across the load during one ac cycle of the input voltage.

During succeeding half-cycles (A and B) of the input voltage, V1 and V2 continue to conduct alternately, each permitting current to ﬂow during the half-cycle where its plate is positive with respect to the cathode junction. Since there are two output pulses for each complete cycle of the input voltage, the current through the load is a series of unidirectional pulses which have a frequency twice that of the ac supply frequency. With the ripple frequency twice that of the ac input voltage and the current much less discontinuous than that of the half-wave rectifier, the pulsations are easily smoothed out by a suitable filter circuit. Furthermore, the efficiency of the full-wave rectifier is far greater than that of the half-wave type.

Since there are two output pulses for each ac cycle, compared to only one in the half-wave rectifier, the average current value of the full-wave rectifier is twice that of the half-wave rectifier, or 0.636 times the peak current value. Similarly, the average of the output voltage is twice that of the half-wave rectifier for the same input, or 0.636 times the peak voltage value. Since the peak voltage is 1.414 times the rms voltage across the transformer secondary, the average output voltage is 1.414 x 0.636, or 0.9 times the rms value of the secondary voltage (across one-half of the winding). Equivalently, the rms voltage across one-half of the transformer secondary must be 1/0.9 or 1.1 times the desired average value of the output voltage, or only one-half that required for a half—wave rectifier. (Across the entire secondary the value is the same as for a half-wave rectifier.)

Note in Fig. 7 that when V1 is conducting, its cathode is at a