in the direction indicated by the dotted arrows. Thus, the second half-cycle (B) of the supply voltage is reproduced by conducting tubes V3 and V4 and across the load resistor, as shown by the wave- forms (N) in Fig. 10. Note that the current pulses (A and B) ﬂow through the load resistor in the same direction during both half- cycles, each pulse flowing from the Vl-V3 plate junction toward the V2-V4 cathode junction of the load resistor. This makes the plate-end of the load resistor negative and the cathode-end positive, since electron current flows from minus to plus. The current pulses thus are unidirectional and their ripple frequency is twice that of the ac supply frequency, just as for the conventional full-wave rectifier circuit.

Advantages and Limitations. One advantage of the bridge rectifier over the conventional full-wave rectifier is that the bridge circuit produces a voltage output nearly twice that of the full-wave circuit for a given power transformer. In the full-wave rectifier the transformer secondary voltage is split and only one-half of the total is applied to the conducting tube. In the bridge circuit, however, the full voltage of the secondary winding is applied across the two conducting tubes during each half-cycle. Therefore, the voltage developed across the load resistor is twice that of a conventional full-wave circuit less the voltage drop wasted across the two conducting tubes. The average dc output voltage of the bridge rectifier is 0.9 times the rms value of the full transformer secondary voltage, compared to 0.9 times the rms value of half ,the secondary Voltage (one side of center-tap) for the ordinary full-wave rectifier. It is clear that the bridge rectifier makes better use of the transformer than the full-wave rectifier circuit.

A second advantage of the bridge circuit is that the inverse voltage impressed across each (nonconducting) tube is only half that applied across each tube of a full-wave rectifier. This is evident from the circuit diagram (Fig. 10) inasmuch as two tubes in series divide the transformer secondary voltage between them. The inverse voltage rating of tubes used in bridge rectifiers need be only half of that required for conventional full-wave rectifier tubes. Hence the bridge rectifier is popular for high-voltage work.

One disadvantage of the bridge circuit is that four tubes are required, which makes the operation somewhat uneconomical. (As we shall see in a moment, two tubes cannot be combined in one envelope because the cathodes are not at the same potential and therefore cannot be connected in parallel.)

More detrimental to the utility of bridge rectifiers is the fact that the cathodes (or filaments) of the tubes are not at the same