ondary voltage. This theoretical value is attained only when no load current is drawn from the output of the circuit.

When a dc load current is drawn, the output voltage drops below 2E by an amount that depends on the magnitude of the load current and the value of the capacitors. It is evident that the energy delivered to the load must come from discharging capacitors C1 and C2 during the time that the diodes are not replenishing the charge (i.e., during alternate half-cycles). If a large load current is drawn, the diodes cannot replenish the charge as fast as it is used and the voltage across Cl and C2 falls greatly. If the capacitors are made sufficiently large (more than 10 microfarads) a fairly large load current can be supplied for short intervals with reasonably good regulation. Large capacitors draw very high peak currents that may damage the diodes, unless protective resistors are placed in series with the tubes.

In general, the poor voltage regulation of the voltage doubler limits it to applications where the average load-current drain is small. This does not mean that relatively large currents cannot be drawn for a few microseconds, as in pulse-circuit applications.

13. Half-Wave (Cascade) Voltage Doubler

Figure 12 illustrates the half-wave voltage doubler, which operates in a slightly different fashion. Because of its configuration, this circuit is also known as the cascade voltage doubler. One immediately apparent advantage of the circuit is that one side of the supply is common with the negative output terminal, permitting both to be grounded. This is especially of advantage in transformerless circuits opera-ted directly from the ac supply line.

Assume initially that diode V2 is disconnected from the circuit. When the top of the transformer secondary is instantaneously negative (during negative half-cycles), an electron current flows through diode V1 in the direction indicated by the dotted arrows, and charges up capacitor C1 to the peak value (E) of the transformer secondary voltage. It is evident that the top plate of C1 becomes positively charged.

Consider the voltage at point X in Fig. 12, which is the junction of the upper plate of C and the cathode of V1. The voltage across the transformer secondary fluctuates between peak values of +E, as shown by the upper waveform in Fig. 12, right. After a few cycles capacitor C1 charges up to the positive peak value of the supply voltage (+12) and holds this charge. Since the capacitor is in series with the transformer secondary the