amplitudes. There are, therefore, six fluctuations in the output voltages of the wyes for each ac supply cycle and the ripple frequency is six times that of the ac supply.

Because of the action of the balance coil, the actual dc output voltage across the load does not follow the peaks of the wye output voltages, but rather the average of the rectified wye output voltages, as is shown in Fig. 18. The peak current through each tube is only one-half of the average DC load current. The rms voltage required across each leg of the transformer secondary is still 0.855 times the average desired DC output voltage for the delta-wye half-wave rectifier circuit shown in Fig. 16. This somewhat paradoxical situation is due to the requirements of the interphase balance coil, which must insure that the individual three-phase half-wave systems (upper and lower wyes) operate independently with current flowing through each tube one-third of the time. Note that the voltage across the balance coil is the difference between the output voltages of the individual wyes. To assure independent operation, the coil must have enough inductance for the voltage (difference) across it to give rise to a peak alternating current that is less than the direct current flowing through one leg of the coil. To be exact, the peak value of the alternating current in the coil must be less than one-half the DC load current. This is the reason for the low peak-current per tube compared to the average DC load current. Note also that the direct current flows in opposing directions through the two halves of the balance coil, which means no dc saturation is present.

Example: Assume a 230-volt three-phase, 60-cycle ac line is connected to the primary of a 1:1 transformer operating in the double-wye rectifier circuit, shown in Fig. 18. If the average DC drawn by the load is 100 amps, what are the average and peak currents per rectifier tube, the average DC output voltage, the DC power delivered to the load, and the ripple frequency?

Solution: The average current per plate is obviously one-sixth of the DC load current, since there are six tubes. Thus, the average current per tube is 100/6=16.7 amperes. The peak current per tube is one-half the average load current, or ½ x 100=50 amperes. DC output voltage is 1/0.855 or 1.17 times the rms value across each leg of the transformer secondary. For a 1:1 transformer, the secondary leg voltage must be 230 volts; the DC output voltage (neglecting the transformer and tube drops) is 1.17 x 230 or 269 volts. In practice this value will he lower because of the voltage drops lost in the tubes and transformer. The DC power delivered to the load is the product of the average DC output voltage and the load current, or 269 x 100 = 26,900 watts. Finally, the ripple frequency is six times the supply frequency, or 6 x 60 = 360 cycles. This is easily made pure DC with a simple filter circuit. (See Chap. 4.)