22. Three-Phase Delta-Star (Six-Phase Half-Wave) Rectifier The equivalent of six-phase operation from a three-phase supply can be attained by centertapping the secondary winding of a threephase transformer more easily than it can be achieved in the doublewye circuit. Refer to the single-phase, centertapped transformer shown for the full-wave circuit in Chap. 2, Fig. 7. Such a starconnected secondary will have voltages of opposing polarities across each half of a winding with respect to centertap, giving effectively a total of six phases (one for each leg of the star.) A typical threephase delta-star rectifier circuit is shown in Fig. 19.

Note that the delta-star circuit requires six half-wave rectifier tubes, one for each phase or secondary leg, just like the double-wye circuit. The output waveform is similar to that shown for the double-wye circuit (Fig. 18) and also has a ripple frequency equal to six times that of the ac supply.

Because of the absence of the balance coil the limitations with respect to the peak and average currents do not apply to the deltastar circuit and the average DC load current of the latter turns out to be 0.955 times the value of the peak current per tube. The average output voltage is thus also 0.955 times the peak voltage, or 1.414 x 0.955 = 1.35 times the rms value (Es) of the secondary voltage across each leg. Equivalently, the rms voltage across each secondary leg must be 1/1.35 or 0.74 times the average desired dc output voltage.

For example, if an output voltage of 300 volts at a load current of 10 amperes is desired in the circuit of Fig. 19, the ac rms voltage across each secondary leg (Es) must be 300 x 0.74 = 222 volts, and the peak current per tube is 10/0.955 or 10.5 amperes. The average current per tube is, of course, 10/6 or 1.67 amperes for each of the six tubes.

23. Three-Phase Full-Wave Delta-Wye Rectifier

The full-wave delta-wye (sometimes called the three-phase, fullwave bridge circuit) rectifier circuit shown in Fig. 20 is essentially an extension of the single-phase full-wave bridge rectifier, described in the last chapter (Fig. 10). Although this circuit uses double the number of tubes of the three-phase, half-wave, delta-wye rectifier (Fig. 16), it has the advantage of delivering twice the output voltage of the half-wave rectifier for the same total secondary voltage (Es).

Note in Fig. 20 that each leg of the secondary wye is connected to the junction of two half-wave rectifiers, arranged back-to-back, so