be only 1/2.34 or 0.428 times the value of the average desired dc output voltage.

Example: The transformer secondary voltage per leg (Es) in a full-wave deltawye rectifier is 150 volts rms, the load current 2 amperes. What is the average DC output voltage, the peak and average current through each tube, and the average power delivered to the load?

Solution: Since the average DC output voltage is 2.34 times the rms voltage across each leg, the output voltage is 2.34 x 150 = 351 volts. The peak current through each tube is 1/0.955 or 1.05 times the average load current; the peak current is 1.05 x 2 = 2.10 amperes per tube. The average current per tube is one-third of the total, or 1 /3 x 2=0.667 ampere. Finally, the average power is the product of the average current and the output voltage, or 2 x 351 = 702 watts.

24. Uses of Polyphase Circuits

Polyphase rectifiers are used only when the efficiency of rectification is more important than the cost of the rectifier itself. This is generally the case when the required DC power exceeds about 1 kilowatt. Many industrial plants, broadcast and television stations requiring up to 20,000 volts DC at peak currents of 10 amperes or more utilize polyphase circuits. The tubes employed are generally the gas-filled (mercury-vapor) type. Polyphase circuits also have the advantage over single-phase types of developing fairly steady output voltages that require little filtering. Finally, the more efficient polyphase circuits give a higher output voltage relative to the peak inverse voltage of the tube and utilize the power transformer more efficiently than do equivalent single-phase circuits.

25. Review Questions

(1) State some of the advantages of three-phase power systems over singlephase supplies.

(2) Draw the circuit and output waveform of a three-phase half-wave delta-wye rectifier and explain its operation.

(3) What is the advantage of the delta-zig-zag connection over the deltawye circuit? Is there any difference in the output waveform of the circuit; in the average and peak currents; in the ripple frequency?

(4) Why is the half-wave double-wye circuit sometimes called a six-phase rectifier? What is the ripple frequency of the output?

(5) Explain the function of the interphase balance coil in the double-wye circuit and how it affects the ratio of the peak current per tube to the average load current. Compare ratio with that of the half-wave delta-wye rectifier.

(6) Compare the operation of a double-wye circuit with that of the delta-star rectifier connection. How would you convert one into the other?