between the half-wave and full-wave action is that the capacitor discharges more between current pulses of the half-wave rectifier, so the DC output voltage of the latter averages less than that of the full-wave rectifier, which almost equals the peak voltage. The actual value of the average DC output voltage relative to the peak value depends on the capacitance and the amount of load current drawn. If the capacitance is large, more energy is stored during current pulses and the capacitor output voltage remains relatively high during discharge. In contrast, if the load current is large, the capacitor discharges rapidly between current pulses and the average de output voltage falls to a low value.

Because of its poor regulation (large output voltage drops for small load current increases) the simple capacitor filter is not used with rectifiers that supply a substantial load current. Also, the amount of ripple remaining is greater than can be tolerated in the plate supply of most electronic circuits. Finally, the capacitor filter draws large charging currents that may damage some rectifier tubes. The filter is used sometimes in the output of voltage multipliers where input chokes cannot be employed.

28. Inductance Filter

The action of a single inductor (choke coil), placed in series with the rectifier output, is illustrated in Fig. 22. This filter is usually used in combination with shunt capacitors, as we shall see later.

Essentially, any inductor opposes a change in the magnitude of the current flowing through it by storing up energy in its magnetic field when the current tends to increase, and by taking energy away from the field to maintain current flow when the voltage across the inductor tends to decrease. Hence, by placing a choke coil in series with the rectifier and load, abrupt changes in the magnitude of the rectifier output current and the load voltage are minimized. Another way of looking at the :iction of the series inductor is to consider that the coil offers a very low resistance (only that of the winding) to the passage of de, while offering at the same time a high impedance to the passage of fluctuating or alternating currents. The DC passes through, and the ripple is largely reduced.

As shown by the output waveform in Fig. 22, the load current through the filter (and hence the load voltage) lags 90° behind the rectifier output ,oltage and never reaches its peak value. The average DC output voltage from a single inductor is less than that from the capacitor filter, but the voltage does not fall off as rapidly with increases in load current as with a capacitor filter.