Hence, the output ripple is only 0.53% of the input ripple.

Uses of R-C Filters. Because of their relatively low expense R-C filters are popular in a wide variety of low-current drain applications including oscilloscope power supplies, and decoupling networks in resistance-coupled amplifiers. In these applications, some voltage drop in the filter is permissible and the current drain is sufficiently low to prevent the voltage drop from becoming excessive. Whenever large load currents are required, however, the high voltage drop developed across the resistance of an R-C filter cannot be tolerated.

32. Comparison and Design of Capacitor-Input and Choke-Input Filters

The main electrical difference between choke-input and capacitorinput filters is that current flows continuously from the rectifier to the filter in choke-input circuits, while current flow is an intermittent series of charging pulses in capacitor-input circuits. The consequences of this basic difference are a higher DC output voltage, lower ripple voltage and poorer voltage regulation for a capacitor-input filter than for the choke-input type, when both are used with the same circuit and load. Furthermore, in a capacitor-input filter the ripple voltage increases with increasing load current (i.e., the filtering becomes poorer), while for chokeinput filters the ripple voltage is independent of the load current. Finally, the ratio of the peak current to the average de flowing through the rectifier tubes is higher for a capacitor-input filter than for the corresponding choke-input drcuit. This results in poor utilization of rectifier tubes and the transformer for capacitor-input filters.

Applications. In general, capacitor-input filters are employed when the amount of required DC power is small. This is the case in most electronic home appliances, radio sets, television receivers, and small public-address systems. Choke-input filters, on the other hand, are used whenever the amount of DC power required is large, because of the savings in tubes and transformer costs resulting from the lower peak currents. For this reason, choke-input filter circuits are exclusively used in polyphase rectifiers and wherever