seldom used in rectifier power supplies, although they find considerable application in other types of electronic circuits.

34. Review Questions

(1) What is meant by the fundamental ripple frequency and the harmonics; what is their relationship to each other?

(2) Draw a capacitor- filter circuit, explain its action and describe its advantages and disadvantages.

(3) Explain the action of an inductance filter and compare it with a capacitance filter.

(4) Why is a capacitor-input filter better than a single shunt capacitor? What is the maximum DC output voltage of the filter and how does it vary with increasing load current?

(5) What is a bleeder resistor and why is it necessary in the output of a capacitance-type filter? What are its other advantages in conjunction with any type of filter?

(6) Compare the operation of a choke-input filter with that of a capacitorinput filter. State which filter has better voltage regulation? lower ripple voltage? higher DC output voltage? For which application is each filter best suited?

(7) What is meant by the minimum input inductance of a choke-input filter? Compute the minimum inductance for a three-phase, full-wave, 60-cycle circuit, if the DC output voltage is 400 volts and the load current is 250 ma.

(8) Define incremental inductance. How does the variation in incremental inductance of a swinging choke make it useful for choke-input filters?

(9) When is a resistance-capacitance filter practicable? Compute the ripple reduction factor of an R-C filter, using 25·μf shunt capacitors and a 20,000-ohm series resistor, for a 60-cycle, single-phase, half-wave rectifier circuit.

(10) Design a choke-input filter for a three-phase, full-wave, 60-cycle rectifier, so that the tundamental ripple voltage from the filter output is only 0.1 % of the input ripple. The DC voltage of the rectifier is 300 volts, the output current is 500 ma, and the bleeder current is 50 ma. (Hint: Compute first the minimum input inductance of the filter, then the value of the shunt capacitance.)

(11) What value capacitance is required to tune the filter in question (IO) to parallel resonance at the fundamental ripple frequency?