ratings is explained in Chap. I. For full-wave types (two diodes
in one envelope) the maximum plate currents listed apply to the
plate of one diode only.

36. Rectifier Circuit Design Data

Table 1 summarizes the main characteristic and design factors
of the various rectifier circuits discussed in Chaps. 2 and 3. The
significance of these factors has been described in detail in Chaps.
2 and 3, but it may be well to explain the derivation and use of
the table, and in the process recapitulate the meaning of the
various design factors.

All numerical factors in Table 1 are ratios based on a DC output
voltage of l volt, or a DC output of I amp. In the case of the
secondary ac voltages and currents, the numbers express the ratio
of the rms value of the voltage or current to the DC output voltage
or current. The average current per tube expresses the fraction
contributed by each tube to the total DC output (taken as I). The
value of the peak current per tube expresses the ratio of the peak
value of the output current waveform to its average or DC value,
taken as I. This is the inverse of the average-to-peak current
(or voltage) ratio, previously stated in Chaps. 2 and 3 for various
circuits. For example, it was stated that the average current of
single-phase, full-wave rectifier is 0.636 times the peak current.
In Table I the inverse ratio (peak current to average current) is
listed as 1.57, which evidently is 1/0.636. Note, however, that the
peak-to-average ratios assume that nothing is done to change the
output current waveform of the rectifier. In other words, the rectifier
must be connected directly to a pure resistance load, so that
the full ripple in the output waveform is present. If the rectifier
is connected to a filter, the output waveform is changed by suppression
of the ripple and the average current or voltage values
begin to approach the peak values. The values listed in Table 1
do not apply to filter operation. In the case of an "ideal" chokeinput
filter (with infinite input inductance), for example, the
current ripple is entirely suppressed and the average DC load
current becomes equal to the peak current per plate. (The exception
is the double-wye, three-phase circuit, where the peak currentper-
tube must be held to one-half of the average DC current, as
explained in Chap. 3).

Table 1 also lists the rms ripple voltage as a percentage of the
de output voltage. These values were obtained by taking the
root-mean-square value of the sum of the fundamental and har