monic ripple voltage amplitudes. The values stated represent the combined effect of all ripple components present in the rectifier output. This is useful for filter calculations.

The values listed in Table I for the secondary winding voltages and currents (Es and Is, respectively) assume that no voltage is lost in the transformer windings and across the tubes. To obtain actual values for the required secondary voltages and currents in a specific circuit, the voltage drop across the transformer secondary windings and the tube voltage drops must be added to the value obtained from Table I. Manufacturer's component data and tube manuals may be consulted to obtain the tube and transformer drops.

The kva (kilovolt-amperes) values listed in Table I for the transformer primary permit estimating current-handling requirements of the transformer and its required kva rating. Note the excessive kva rating for the single-phase, half-wave circuit; this is caused by the DC saturation of the unbalanced rectified current flowing through the transformer secondary, as was explained in Chap. 2. The kva rating represents the input power including the reactive component. To obtain the true input power the kva value must be multiplied by the power factor of the circuit. Both the kva and the power factor listing assume that there are no losses in the transformer. To obtain true values these losses must be added to the listed values.

As is apparent from Table I, the relation between the peak inverse voltage per tube and the DC output voltage depends on the rectifier circuit. The listings represent minimum values calculated for sinewave conditions. Because of the presence of line surges and other transients a safety factor should be allowed for the peak inverse voltage per tube. Tubes should be selected (from Table II) whose peak inverse voltage rating exceeds the required values listed in Table I for the particular circuit used.

The proper use of Table I will become evident through the examples of rectifier calculations, worked out later on in the chapter. For complete rectifier-filter circuit design all the tables in this chapter must be used in conjunction with each other.

37. Filter Design Data

Some of the critical design factors determining filter operation have been discussed in Chap. 4 and formulas have been given for computing the reduction in ripple voltage for different filter sections. These various factors and relations are summarized in the filter design chart of Table II, which gives the minimum