gives an L-C product of about 30 for the three-phase, half-wave circuit. The value of the shunt capacitor, therefore, is

The value of the bleeder resistor (if one is provided) to draw 10% of the load current, or 0.3 ampere, should be 3,500/0.3 = 11,667 ohms and its wattage rating must exceed 3,500 x 0.3 = 1050 watts. (The high power rating will probably make it uneconomical to use a bleeder.)

39. Review Questions

(1) What is the chief application of high-vacuum rectifier tubes and at what power level would you begin to use mercury-vapor tubes. What are the relative advantages and disadvantages?

(2) Explain the significance of the rectifier design data in Table I. Why are the transformer requirements for a single-phase, half-wave circuit excessively high?

(3) Describe the effect of resistive, capacitive, and inductive loading of the rectifier output on the ratio of peak to average current per tube.

(4) What allowance should be made, when using Table I, for voltage drops lost in tubes, transformer windings, filter, etc.

(5) How would you obtain the true power rating of a transformer from its kva rating in a specific circuit, using Table I?

(6) Explain the normal design procedure for a choke-input filter, using Table II. What current would you use to compute the minimum input inductance of the choke?

(7) Design a capacitor-input filter, using Table II, that will give a ripple of O.1% with a three-phase, 60-cycle, full-wave circuit. If the shunt capacitance is 5 microfarads, what should be the value of the inductance? Express the ripple in db.

(8) Design a single-phase, half-wave rectifier (60 cycles) that will give 250 volts DC output at a load of 125 ma. Choose a filter, select tubes, and state all component values, including a bleeder resistor.

(9) Design a 60-cycle, three-phase, full-wave (delta-wye) rectifier-filter system with a choke-input filter providing an output of 8,000 volts DC at 5 amperes load current. The ripple voltage should not exceed 0.04% of the DC output voltage.