Capacitance Filter

Consider first the action of a shunt capacitor across the load and rectifier output (Fig. 21). This is the simplest possible type of filter.

It will be remembered that a capacitor opposes any change in voltage across its terminals (the load, in this case) by storing up energy in its electrostatic field whenever the voltage tends to rise, and converting this stored energy back into current flow whenever the voltage across its terminals tends to fall. Some of the energy of the rectifier output pulses is stored in the field of a capacitor, and the capacitor discharges between the rectifier current pulses, considerably reducing the fluctuations in the output voltage (ripple).

Figure 21 shows the action of the capacitor filter when either half-wave or full-wave rectifier output voltages are applied to the filter. In either case the capacitor charges up to the peak voltage of the rectifier output during the time that current pulses are delivered to the filter and load. When the rectifier output drops off to zero, the capacitor cannot discharge instantaneously; its voltage falls off slowly as it discharges through the load. During the next rectifier current pulse, the capacitor is charged again to the peak voltage, and the cycle is repeated. The only difference between the half-wave and full-wave action is that the capacitor discharges more between current pulses of the half-wave rectifier, so the DC output voltage of the latter averages less than that of the full-wave rectifier, which almost equals the peak voltage. The actual value of the average DC output voltage relative to the peak value depends on the capacitance and the amount of load current drawn. If the capacitance is large, more energy is stored during current pulses and the capacitor output voltage remains relatively high during discharge. In contrast, if the load current is large, the capacitor discharges rapidly between current pulses and the average de output voltage falls to a low value.

Because of its poor regulation (large output voltage drops for small load current increases) the simple capacitor filter is not used with rectifiers that supply a substantial load current. Also, the amount of ripple remaining is greater than can be tolerated in the plate supply of most electronic circuits. Finally, the capacitor filter draws large charging currents that may damage some rectifier tubes. The filter is used sometimes in the output of voltage multipliers where input chokes cannot be employed.