Capacitor-Input Filter

More effective filtering action can be attained by combining the actions of a shunt capacitor and a series inductor in capacitance-inductance filters. Various combinations of such filters exist, but in all of them the action of the capacitors is to resist changes in output voltage by charging and discharging, as required, while the inductors oppose any changes in the magnitude of the load current through the action of their associated magnetic field. Equivalently, the shunt capacitors may be considered to form a low impedance path to minus, and ground for the ripple voltage, and an essentially infinite impedance to de. The series inductors (choke coils) can be considered to offer a low impedance to the passage of DC and a very high impedance to the ripple current.

Figure 23 illustrates a capacitor-input filter (also known as a pi-filter) with typical component values. This circuit is characterized by a high output voltage at low current drain, the voltage being almost equal to the peak value of the transformer secondary voltage applied to each tube. (The peak value is 1.414 times the rms value.) As the load current increases the output voltage falls off rapidly (because of the capacitor discharge) and may become less than the rms value of the applied ac voltage. In other words, the regulation of a capacitor-input filter is poor.

The waveforms of Fig. 23 show the basic action of the filter. The current pulses flowing through the rectifier tubes and filter charge up input capacitor C1 to the peak voltage of the transformer secondary. The filter input capacitor must have a rating high enough to withstand the instantaneous peak value (1.414 times the rms value of the ac) if breakdowns are to be avoided. Between current pulses, the voltage across C1 falls off somewhat, but never reaches zero, just as in the case of the simple capacitor filter (Fig. 21). Because of the action of the choke coil (L), the voltage peaks across C1 lag behind the peaks of the rectifier output voltage (obtained without a filter). With the additional filtering provided by the coil and capacitor C2, the DC output voltage becomes essentially constant, as indicated (in exaggerated form) by the solid line in Fig. 23. Actually, a small ripple is still present in the output of the filter, which may be eliminated by adding another filter section.

By increasing the value of the filter capacitors above those shown in Fig. 23 (especially that of input capacitor C1) the ripple voltage may be decreased further and the average DC output voltage will be increased slightly. Increasing the DC output (load) current, however, increases the ripple voltage and reduces the available DC output voltage.

Bleeder. Some resistance must always be connected across the output of the capacitor input filter, even when the normal load is absent. This maximum resistance is called the bleeder resistor, and as its name implies, its chief purpose is to discharge the capacitors when the equipment is turned off. To improve voltage regulation, the bleeder resistor is usually made smaller than this maximum value, as will be explained later on.